Given the risks of subjectivity and anthropocentric prejudice by humans I propose a significantly modified sort of Turing Test. 
Unlike the Turing Test it is not testing for human-like responses (or qualities) nor is it intended to be binary. However we would compare the scores of humans and other entities and be able to agree that within a range of x% various entities have significantly equivalent functionality or qualities.
The initial proposal is that x [X = e.g. no less than 5,000 polled in approximate proportion to global population distribution. Ideally in order to capture more cultural variety 20,000 -50,000 would be polled given the wide disparity in population distribution versus cultural variation. Some studies suggest the margin of error is inversely proportional to the square root of the sample size = square root of p*(1-p). To calculate what our sample size needs to be, we start with the formula for margin of error, and solve it for n sample size. Formula n = (zα/2σ/E)2. 
] number of  (humans) are given descriptions of a range of behaviours without any information on the nature of the actor. They are then asked to score them on a scale of 0-100 [It may be better to then reformat the date using a suitable logarithmic scale? - one for the data scientists to consider.] separately for Aliveness, Sentience, Sapience and Wisdom.
If any life-form scores sufficiently for any of these qualities then we must treat them as having at least some degree of these qualities. 
The relevant questions will have to be deferred for now but clearly the human reliance upon specific types of language capabilities and tool-use must not be given too much weight for sapience given they are not intrinsic to the concepts in discussion [This aspect is the most tricky. In addition, the questions would need to be somehow created in a secure manner that prevents back-analysis to the source of the behaviour (and regularly changed?)].
In addition, given the potential extraordinary gap that has arisen between human technological advancement, knowledge and technical logic versus the purer concept of wisdom we are required to separate out these concepts and qualities so that the combined score includes the difference between qualities of intelligence versus wisdom. Of course humans will also be scored but, in so far as is possible, behind the veil.
The AFIW Index will be used with other scores related to quantities, impact, valuation (including rarity) and various other metrics when making decisions of lawfulness requiring Consensus. 
The value of life-forms is not intended to be based on the extent of equivalence with humans or even solely on high sentience and sapience scores. The AFIW Indexing is just one aspect of the nature of life-forms to be identified, since many life-forms (including much of the flora and biomic lifeforms) would score as being very different to humans and of much simpler organisation but that can not determine their value including to other life-forms. 
"It may be doubted whether there are many other animals [like the earthworm] which have played so important a part in the history of the world, as have these lowly organized creatures."
(Charles Darwen) 
